---
title: Intro
---

## Introducing Local Law 97

In NYC, buildings account for  2/3 of greenhouse gas emissions every year. Just 2 percent of buildings—those over 25,000 square feet—are responsible for 30 percent of emissions.

The city is tackling climate change through the Climate Mobilization Act. Local Law 97, described as the “most ambitious climate change legislation enacted by any city in the world,” is its centerpiece.

> “most ambitious climate change legislation enacted by any city in the world”

Enacted in May 2019, Local Law 97 will set increasingly stringent limits on greenhouse gas emissions for large buildings over the next two decades, with fines for not complying. This affects more than 60,000 buildings, but notably, buildings with affordable housing units are exempt.

This legislation is the latest milestone in a journey toward environmental health. In 2007, Mayor Michael Bloomberg released PlaNYC, a sustainability strategy with a goal to reduce emissions by 30 percent by 2030, using 2005 levels as a benchmark. More recently, Local Laws 84 and 87 have mandated that buildings above 50,000 square feet submit annual reports on energy and water usage.

## The world is watching

Around the world, people are paying attention to how Local Law 97 plays out. A week after the law was passed, members of the C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group had already begun discussing how to follow New York's lead. Various outlets have referred to Local Law 97 as "the most ambitious," "aggressive," and "historic" climate change legislation to date.

The city is cognizant of their precedent-setting role. John Mandyck of Urban Green Council told *CityLab*, "Our point all along has been that if we're going to spend the billions of dollars, let's make sure we come up with policies that are exportable." *CityLab* stated: "If New York can figure out a solution... then it will have necessarily developed the knowlege... that can serve the entire country. Or the world."

Given the importance of this law, it's worth unpacking and understanding various aspects of it. Climate policy can often feel removed from our everyday experiences, but it fundamentally does impact every New Yorker and more.

## Who is impacted?

What obstacles might hinder Local Law 97's implementation? Just how stringent are the emissions targets and timeline? What help can burdened landlords receive? And we can't look at sustainability in isolation—how does this law fit into larger contexts of the economy and society?

The main criticism of Local Law 97 is that too many buildings are exempt, placing unfair pressure on those that must comply. Aside from the usual suspects (such as hospitals, places of worship, public housing, and energy plants), buildings with any rent-regulated units—even just one—are exempt. This means that a whopping 40 percent of residential units must "implement a prescriptive package of energy savings measures" instead.